
THE GRAY NUN

By Nataly Von Eschstruth

Translated from the German by Lionel Strachey


When I was a young man I once made a foreign journey, betaking myself to
the royal court of X. on affairs of state. In those days politics would
take strange turns, not of unmixed delight, and so it happened that my
mission was prolonged well into the winter, and kept me at X. until the
carnival season. But at this I did not repine, for to pass a winter in
a beautiful climate and amid the fascinating society of a court seemed a
welcome change to my enthusiastic, pleasure-loving young soul.

The reigning sovereign had a predilection for masked balls,--a
traditionally favorite amusement at the palace, I was told--and
accordingly several fancy dress festivities were enacted on the royal
premises during the carnival. The first I was unable to participate in
because of an inflamed eye, and therefore awaited the second with all
the keener anticipation.

In the becoming costume of a Prussian officer in the army of Frederick
the Great, and with the agreeable sensation of being specially well
disguised beneath my mask and safe from recognition, I mingled in the
gay throng of the dancers and enjoyed to the full the charm of the
brilliant and delicious event. An exquisitely graceful little water-nix
had conquered my heart. The champagne was bubbling in my blood, and
in wild spirits I was pursuing the fleeing Undine into an adjacent
apartment.

Suddenly I stopped as though spellbound, and found myself staring into
a pair of dark eyes, black as night, which were rigidly fixed upon me.
Standing aloof, in a corner of the room, I saw a nun. Her long gray
garment reached to the ground, and lay about her very feet in folds like
a train. Her arms hung straight down, the hands being concealed in the
loose sleeves. White linen bands covered her head and chin, and rendered
even her mouth invisible, while her forehead and the upper part of her
face were protected by a black velvet mask. And the blackness of those
eyes that penetrated me was so intense that scarcely were any whites
discernible.

An indescribable emotion ran over me as I stood under the ban of an
evil power, as it were, returning the look of that strange figure. I had
forgotten Undine. Drawn by some invisible force, I approached the nun
with mechanical footstep.

“Why, fair mask,” I accosted her with a bold laugh, “are you alone?
Surely you know that for dancing and love two are needed!”

Briefly, like a Chinese idol, she nodded her head in assent; a thrill
seemed to pass over her wonderfully slender shape; yet she did not
budge.

I became more venturesome from a sudden feeling as of fire rushing
through my veins.

“You may be vowed to seclusion, beautiful bride of Heaven, but to-day
the convent walls have released you, to-day you are of the world and the
flesh, to-day you are mine!”

Thus I cried aloud, forgetting in my excitement that I was in a country
where my mother tongue was only spoken and understood at the German
legation.

In a moment it occurred to me: Did the mask know German?

To my astonishment, she gave an immediate sign of intelligence by
gliding, silently as a shadow, another step in my direction, and her
biasing eyes appeared to kindle with merriment. Had she a veil over her
eyes? It almost looked so and this extraordinary measure of precaution
challenged me the more strongly to overcome her reluctance to being
known.

“Do you understand me?” I asked.

She nodded in the same brief, jerky manner as before.

“Do you know me?”

Similarly she answered by negative motions of the head. I stepped up
close to her with the question:

“But will you not know me and love me? Come into my arms, and let us
dance!”

Then something happened that at the moment I found surprising and
extremely startling, yet which I took for a mere carnival freak,
while later on I could scarce review the occurrence with any degree of
clearness.

The nun threw her arms about me abruptly and almost desperately, and
whirled me into a frenzied dance. I felt no body between my arms, and
did not hear the rustle of her dress; I only saw those enigmatic
dark eyes, which glowed near, very near, my own. And in mad career,
regardless of the musical time or of the tune played, my curious partner
tore around the room with me faster and faster, and with ever increasing
fury. Her arms gripped me tighter and tighter and I was threatened
with complete loss of breath in the wild race. Of a sudden I received a
violent blow, resembling an electric shock, from each of her hands on
my shoulders, felt myself all at once liberated, and staggered faint
against a pyramid of plants. Boisterous laughter sounded on my ear; some
other masks had surrounded and seized me, exclaiming:

“Look at the fine gentleman! He is out of his mind, dancing about the
room like a madman, quite alone!”

I opened my eyes and looked all around. What had become of my partner?

Not a sign of her was to be seen, although this other room was likewise
very large, just then not well filled with people.

“Have I been dancing alone?” I gasped, tearing the mask off my burning
face.

“Quite alone! Did you imagine it was with your sweetheart?” was the
mocking, noisy reply.

I was deeply annoyed. “Nonsense!” I cried. “You are all in the
conspiracy! Where has the nun gone? It was no lady at all, it was a man
in disguise!”

They laughed still more, and some whispered behind fans that I must be
drunk.

Strange sensations invaded me. Had a joke been played at my expense? Had
a member of the German legation dressed in female clothes, and in the
height of his whimsical caprice danced with me in that insane fashion?
Were the guests in the secret, and were they amusing themselves--as the
freedom of the carnival permitted--with teasing a foreigner? Yet surely
the mysterious nun must be discoverable. My knees were trembling from a
weakness I was unable to account for, but I collected myself, and
while various thoughts coursed through my brain for a solution of
this carnival prank, I hastened with feverish speed through rooms and
galleries in quest of the nun. But in vain. I espied neither herself,
nor met anyone who had seen her. The lackeys and doorkeepers assured me
in perfect good faith that they had seen no nun of any sort.

“The costume is one of which His Majesty does not approve,” I was
informed in the cloak-room. “It is considered irreverent to appear at
balls here in the spiritual garb of a nun or a monk, and therefore it
is not done. It would certainly have been observed by us had any lady or
gentleman transgressed against the prevailing usage.”

“Then perhaps I may have mistaken for a nun some other mask, who
intended in her gray suit to represent Twilight or Care,” I excused
myself hesitatingly, though I had an accurate eye for dresses, and
could have registered a solemn oath that the mysterious unknown was even
wearing especially authentic claustral attire. No one, however, could
by any effort remember having noticed a costume anything like that
described by me.

“Are there any secret passages to any of the rooms and galleries which
are the scene of tonight’s festivities?” I asked a doorkeeper. He looked
at me in surprise, and answered:

“All ways of communication were opened today because of the crowd of
guests, but for safety’s sake guarded and watched more carefully than
usual. Only the tapestried corridor running the length of the great
colonnade to the royal apartments was left unguarded, since in that
place there is no possibility of improper intrusion.”

A new idea flashed across me. The spot on which I had first set eyes on
my nun was at the entrance to that corridor. Might not a member of the
royal family have elected to make me, as a novice in this foreign court
society, the subject of a merry jest? No doubt the nun was a man in
disguise, and the young princes and dukes were probably capable of
pouncing on the victim and dancing him to death.

My confusion was perhaps very diverting, and the secrecy of the few
spectators of the joke, who were, of course, initiated, was quite
praiseworthy.

They asserted not having seen a nun at all, and laughed at me for having
rushed round the room alone, like a lunatic, Obviously there was no
further room for doubt, this explanation and no other was valid. Why had
I not thought of this before!

So I joined in the hilarity of the others and made the best of my
discomfiture. In any case, the manner in which my partner had dismissed
me betrayed a pair of powerful masculine fists! My shoulders, on which
she had come down so vigorously ached as if they were broken, and I was
still unable to conquer entirely a peculiar sensation of uneasiness.
But while I was pursuing my investigations the clock struck twelve,
the company unmasked, and gaily flocked toward the Supper rooms. I
felt particularly entitled to refreshments, and in the course of my
indulgence in the good things of my selection, my faintness--which was
more astonishing to my robust, muscular young self than any carnival
joke in the world could have been--passed off completely. I was as happy
and lively as before, and enjoyed the remainder of the ball as much as
I had the beginning. I tried to dismiss the episode from my mind. For a
few days I felt a dull pain in my shoulders, which annoyed me at night
also, and disturbed my sleep. The image of the nun haunted me, and the
sombre, penetrating eyes were present to me in my very dreams. This
vexed me, and I mentally abused the royal gentleman in every key who had
pushed his joke rather too far.

A week passed, and the court chamberlain issued invitations for the
third masked ball at the palace. I purchased a sailor’s dress, and on
the evening of the ball tripped up the marble stairs in the best of
spirits. It had in the meanwhile occurred to me that I had perhaps
imbibed too much, and that the prince in nun’s clothing had perhaps
observed my condition, and made me his victim for that reason. But I
rejected that proposition. In the first place, I had not taken much to
drink; certainly two or three glasses of champagne and lemonade were
not worth mentioning when I remembered what quantities of alcohol I had
frequently absorbed in my university days in Germany. I was a brave boon
companion, and capable of consuming a great deal. So how should a few
paltry little glasses make me so unsteady on my feet as to collapse
in dancing a fast gallop? Absurd! I was sure enough of myself, and
sufficiently well brought up in social customs, to know how much one
may drink at a court ball. No--I was convinced that I had not been
intoxicated, but on this occasion I resolved to exercise special
caution, and to be strictly temperate, in the event of the disguised
perpetrator of pranks again attempting to make the German stranger the
butt of his impudence. This time he should meet his match; I would keep
my head clear and my feet steady enough to venture a dance with him. The
constantly suspicious attitude of my mind, to be sure, interfered with
my pleasure very considerably. I was in a too observant mood to float on
the topmost wave of enjoyment, and besides an extraordinary disquietude
had seized upon me, a contraction about the heart that was quite new to
me, such as sensitive people undergo before a storm or in anticipation
of momentous changes of fortune. I wandered about restlessly. Numerous
though the merry masks that flitted around me, that nun’s indescribable
black eyes did not appear, and no effort was made to involve me again as
the hero of another frolic. Time was dragging heavily. I glanced at my
watch, and wished the supper hour might be near. The finger only pointed
to half past eleven, so that I must still possess my soul in patience
for half an hour. It was a lovely, mild, moonlight night; the doors to
the tapestried passage and the colonnade had been thrown open, and I
concluded to take a breath of the fragrant air and a rapid view of the
illuminated town in its festive brilliancy of a carnival night.

A female pierrot dances past me with Don Juan, and, with a laugh,
throws a handful of confetti in my face. I retaliate--a few phrases are
exchanged--I look after her for a moment--and then turn to the entrance
of the corridor, to get out into the colonnade.

I am rooted to the ground!

Standing aside in a corner, on the very same spot as before, is my nun,
staring at me with the same unfathomable eyes as a week ago!

Where had she come from?

Out of the ground? Or had she slipped in through the door during my
banter with the pierrot?

She had come through the door, of course.

I am utterly amazed. The same costume. The same joke. How clumsy of the
prince to repeat himself, I am inclined to ignore the impertinent young
gentleman, and pass him proudly by--yet--strange--again I am attracted
irresistibly, as by a supernatural power, held by those black orbs. I
am quite certain of my wits this time: the dress is really the forbidden
costume of a nun, and, so far as I can judge, exact in every particular.
On her breast hangs a large cross, which is especially conspicuous. It
is of dull gold, with emeralds and pearls inlaid, of peculiar shape,
and certainly antique. The pious nun seems to have regaled herself with
excessive haste at some sideboard, since the white collar and the front
of the gray bodice show oblong dark stains, as though some beverage had
been spilt.

“Well, fair mask,” finally remark in a mocking tone, although my heart
is beating furiously, “you have been waiting for me here, I presume?”

She nods slowly and solemnly.

“Do you imagine, by chance, that I wish to dance another hurricane with
you?”

Again she assents, but more emphatically.

“Then,” say I, ironically, “see where you can find a new blockhead, my
muscular fairy! My shoulders are not well yet!”

Her arms move--hands there are none visible in the long, roomy
sleeves--they are stretched out to me as if in mute appeal. A cold
shiver runs down my back, I know not why.

“If I dance with you again,” I angrily exclaim, “you will not fare quite
so well as last time! I am firmer on my feet to-night than I was last
week!”

She presses her arms to her breast, something like a tremor agitates the
gray shape, and her head is slightly raised. Her position and demeanor,
though she utters not a word, denote intense longing.

The blood rushes to my head--I must go a step nearer to her--I must!

“If I dance with you, it will be only on one condition!”

With a profound sigh her bosom heaves, her arms fall to her side, her
body is humbly bent forward as if in complete surrender, and as if to
say: Ask what you will!

“My condition is that you afterward reveal yourself.”

She nods stiffly, like a marionette.

“Swear to it!”

She raises her arm for the oath, but the gray folds still conceal her
hand.

“Woe betide you if you deceive me!”

She shakes her head, and repeats the passionate gesture of entreaty. Her
slender form trembles with feverish impatience, and the wonderful eyes
seem to plead, in extreme urgency: Come quickly!

I put out my arms--

Once more does the terrible woman rush at me, once more am I held in
that mad embrace, once more--on the wings of the wind--do we dash round
the room! And once more are all my senses lost in the fiendish whirl!

I attempt to struggle, would pit the abounding strength of my youth
against the woman and subdue her. In vain! I can think, I can act, no
longer. My whole being is in a swoon, and I am conscious of nothing but
two icy lips pressed upon mine with a vehemence calculated to draw my
very life out of me.

A shudder seizes me, and the fear of death, and then--again that blow on
my shoulders--

I feel as if a pair of iron clamps had been taken off me and I had been
freed, and I sink down upon a sofa.

A laughing, jeering crowd surrounds me, shouting:

“The sailor is crazy! He has gone out of his mind!”

Have I again been dancing alone in public?

I jump up in a rage, and exclaim, as I toss back my dishevelled hair
from my burning brow:

“Abominable trickery! Let me pass! Let me get my hands on her, and
unmask her!”

Something rings on the floor. It has fallen from my hand, hitherto
clenched and just now opened. Triumphantly I snatch it up, exulting:

“Her cross! Ha! that shall be my clue!”

On this occasion, too, no trace of the mysterious nun was to be found.
It was at first superciliously assumed, as before, that I must be drunk
or insane, but my serious mood and energetic investigations soon altered
that notion. I might myself have doubted my mental soundness had it not
been for the cross in my hand, which I at once recognized as being that
worn by the nun, and had not a lackey finally confessed to having beheld
the strange figure. He was coming from the colonnade with a tray of
refreshments when he saw me in conversation with her. The mask had
something familiar about her, he said, but he could not remember where
he had seen her before. He had been a servant in the palace for forty
years.

Nobody thought of a spectre; on the other hand extravagant speculations
became rife of a conspirator being at work. It was rumored the king had
originally intended to wear a sailor costume.

Of course, it was him the uncanny visitor had designs upon. In view of
the fact that the political horizon was very dark and clouded at that
time, the conjecture was perhaps not altogether phantastical, and for
this reason the report quickly reached the ears of the king and the
royal family. I was promptly summoned before His Majesty, and it gave
me a sort of revengeful pleasure to relate the incident to that august
person. For I was still fully persuaded that some young member of his
family had played this obnoxious trick upon me.

The king nodded thoughtfully upon my frank declaration that, according
to my researches, the enigmatical female could only have come from the
royal apartments.

Said his Majesty:

“May I ask you, my dear Baron, to show me the cross you found?”

I put it into his hand.

For a moment the king stared upon it speechless. Then he turned it
over, and ejaculated, roughly almost under the emotion of his violent
surprise:

“Great God--why--it is--!”

And he pointed to the small, delicately engraved initials, surmounted by
a crown, in the middle of the cross. Very pale and with heaving breast
he went on:

“A nun, a gray nun, you say? What would the object of such a joke be?
and how--how should this cross come back among the living? Baron, come
with me, I must request your confidence and secrecy!”

We passed through several rooms, and then arrived at a narrow gallery
whose walls were hung with portraits of royal personages. The king came
abruptly to a halt, and without himself looking up indicated a certain
picture:

“Observe that painting! Do you see the same Cross there that you have in
your hand?”

Involuntarily I uttered the loud cry:

“Why, that is she! Holy Heavens! It is my nun!”

“The cross--compare the cross!” urged the king, his slender, white hand
trembling with agitation.

A frosty current ran through my veins as I compared the pictured cross
with that in my companion’s hand. It was the same--not a doubt of
it--and the eyes, too, were the same, as also the dress and the whole
figure were unmistakably those of the gray nun I had danced with. Yet
in those conspicuously large, deep black eyes lay not an expression of
peacefulness and mild resignation, but a world of passionate feeling.
Having assured the king of the identity of the cross, and he having
informed me that it was an ancient heirloom of which no duplicate
existed, he bade me accompany him further.

Arrived in the antechamber to his apartments, the king gave an order to
one of the attendants on duty there. He walked up and down the room for
a few moments in visible excitement, and then, stopping before me, and
looking at me searchingly, he asked:

“Have you ever, in the course of your life, met with a manifestation of
the supernatural?”

I was so bewildered and nervous that I scarcely could remember enough
French to reply:

“May it please your Majesty, I have not.”

“Do you believe in the possibility of the dead returning?”

“Not in the sense of their coming as apparitions. I always was, still
am, a skeptic on the point of ghost stories in general, nevertheless I
am a Christian, and I believe and know that we continue to live after
death.”

The king stared at me mechanically:

“You are a Protestant, and you say you are a skeptic. Curious--only you
saw the apparition--it was revealed to no one else?”

“Then your Majesty is of the opinion that this is actually a case of a
spectral apparition?”

“Certainly. It seems much more plausible than open theft. This very
cross I myself--”

He interrupted his sentence as he turned to the door, through which,
with profound obeisances, entered two ladies in waiting--probably the
queen’s. His Majesty addressed one of them in French, no doubt to enable
me to participate in the conversation:

“You were present, Madame M., when Princess A. was laid in her coffin
seventeen years ago?”

A low curtsey was the affirmative reply.

“And you also, Madame U.?”

“I had the honor, your Majesty, of rendering her royal highness the last
earthly services.”

“You remember perfectly what dress the deceased was buried in?”

“Quite well, your Majesty. It was the regular dress of the Order of Gray
Sisters, of which her royal highness was a member.”

“Do you recollect whether she took any ornaments to her last resting
place?”

“Excepting the golden cross which your Majesty hung round her neck
on the day she took the vow, no jewelry was put on the princess. The
duchess even drew the little sapphire ring from her royal highness’
finger, to keep it as a remembrance and wear it herself.”

“You are absolutely certain that the cross went into the coffin? You
could swear to it?”

“I could do so with fullest conviction, your Majesty.”

“Would you recognize the cross?”

“To be sure I should.”

“Is this it?”

“Good Heavens--it is! On the back there ought to be the initials of her
royal highness!”

“Here they are,” said the king, reversing the cross. The old woman
shrank back appalled.

“Then, your Majesty, the vault has been broken into!”

“Possibly it has. The matter shall be investigated. I am much obliged to
you, ladies, and earnestly request you will both preserve unconditional
silence as to our present interview.”

“Well,” said the king to me, after the ladies in waiting had withdrawn,
“how do you account for this cross being here in my hand, considering
it was put into the coffin? You think the vault may have been pillaged?
That, I believe, is out of the question. The object of a carnival freak,
which could have been perpetrated just as easily in any other dress, is
far too slight to make such a horrible offense as the violation of the
dead worth while! But I intend to have the vault examined, and beg, my
dear baron, that you will attend. For the present, good night.”

I spent a dreadful night, torturing my sleepless brain for a solution
of the riddle, and being forever haunted by the nun’s dark eyes. It was
late when I woke.

Some hours after, the coffin was opened in the presence of the king,
whose surmise proved correct. The bolts on the coffin were intact. The
gold chain was there, safe round the princess’ neck. But the cross was
gone. There was not the remotest sign of violence.

How I got out of that vault, I do not know. I remember feeling faint,
and being supported by two court officials. I am unaware of what
happened next. It was the only instance in my life in which my system
had so entirely given way. A serious illness was apprehended, but
my strong constitution won the day. For a long time my mind was in a
precarious state.

When I had recovered, the king sent for me.

“Are you still a skeptic?” he asked in a grave voice.

“No, your Majesty, I am convinced now.”

Whereupon the king himself deigned to communicate to me the particulars
relating to the golden cross.

Princess A. was a daughter of one of his cousins, and she was their
fifth child. The duchess, a very pious woman, made a vow before the
birth of her sixth child, that if it was a boy, her youngest daughter
should be dedicated to the service of the church and take the veil. A
son was born, and Princess A. henceforth was educated for the profession
of a nun in becoming retirement and seclusion. Unfortunately, however,
the natural traits of the girl seemed to be entirely in opposition to
that reverend calling. An irrepressible vivacity of spirit, an intense
coveting of worldly joys and pleasures characterized her, and the more
she was separated from the world the more ardent grew her desire to live
in it. Heartrending scenes of resistance and tears were enacted, and
the reigning sovereign felt so much pity for the spirited young creature
that he attempted to save her from her fate of being immured in convent
walls by offering to apply to the pope for a dispensation releasing the
mother from her promise. But the duchess desperately combated this idea.
Her wild laments, that to break her vow would entail her forfeiture of
eternal salvation, her protestations, her tears, her entreaties, at last
prevailed upon the princess to join the Order of the Gray Sisters. For a
short space all seemed to go well. The fervid heart of the royal nun was
apparently beating placidly, in the quiet claustral surroundings. But
during the winter the duchess fell sick, and the young bride of the
church was called to her bedside. Princess A. had remained with her
mother for several weeks, and about that time the carnival season began.
Masked balls were given in the palace, and while the horns and violins
were sounding in the ballroom Princess A. lay on her knees in the throes
of dreadful despair, tearing her hair in furious longing for that lost
paradise. She at last succeeded in bribing a chambermaid to secretly
procure her a fancy dress. If it was to cost her immortal soul, once
she would dance and be young and happy! The plot was betrayed, and the
angriest reproaches were poured out by her parents upon the perjured,
rebellious nun! Princess A. was locked up, and was to be removed to the
convent the next day. However, as the festivities in the palace were
reaching their height that night, the unhappy young nun lay expiring in
her room. She had taken poison, although the report was spread in the
capital that failure of the heart had caused her death. How she came
into possession of the poison no one ever discovered. While she was
writhing in terrible agony her half-crazed mother put a cup of milk to
her lips as an antidote. She dashed it passionately aside and the spilt
milk left stains on her dress.

How hard it was to die! Again and again she tore her black hair. Again
and again she uttered the bitterest imprecations and the fiercest cries
for a taste of youth and happiness. At length she stood up, straining
her ears for the music in the ballroom.

And then she screamed aloud:

“Oh, I must dance once! I must kiss once! Let me be happy once! I cannot
die before I dance! Let me go--let me dance--let me--”

She drew herself up to her full height, her eyes glowed like live coals,
she took a few steps towards the door--

“I must dance--let me dance!” she gasped, and fell stiffly forward on
the floor--dead.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gray Nun, by Nataly Von Eschstruth

